[DRAFT]: init helm upgrade guide for 4.x to 5.x (#937)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/kubernetes/pages/helm-upgrade-guide.adoc

= Helm Upgrade Guide

Before upgrade, we recommend you to check link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.3/maintain-cluster/rolling-upgrades#hazelcast-members-compatibility-guarantees[Hazelcast's Compatibility Guarantees].

> 

Author: I think the paragraph starting with `helm upgrade command does not allow modifications to` should be before this header. It is a general explanation. WDYT?

> If you are not using hotRestart (aka persistence) feature and Management Center's persistence feature, tests cannot cover every scenario, but no problems expected during upgrade.

Author: I think this note makes it a bit confusing, because we cannot cover every scenario in case persistence is enabled, too. From the user's perspective, this sentence makes me think they cover all scenarios when persistence is enabled, but they cannot cover when it is disabled.

`helm upgrade` command does not allow modifications to `spec.volumeClaimTemplates` property in stateful sets that prevents upgrade which can be seen in link:https://github.com/helm/charts/issues/7803[this helm issue]. Because of this issue, we have some upgrade limitations related to Management Center's persistence and hotRestart/persistence that uses volumeClaimTemplates internally. This guide informs you about possible upgrade scenarios.

We recommend to disable Management Center before upgrade, and re-enable it after upgrade. You should follow the steps outlined below:

Step 1: Export values of existing installation:

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <installation-name> > values.yaml
----

Step 2: Disable Management Center:

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade <installation-name> hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise -f values.yaml --version <installed-version> --set mancenter.enabled=false
----

Step 3: Delete persistent volume of the deleted Management Center:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl get pvc -o name | grep "mancenter" | xargs -n 1 kubectl delete
----

> Step 4: Upgrade your installation without disabling Management Center:

Author: Actually, it is compatible with the previous steps. In the second step, we use upgrade command just to disable management center. As you can see in its command, we pass `--version <installed-version>` that is not an actual upgrade.

> Step 4: Upgrade your installation without disabling Management Center:

Author: ```
Upgrade your installation and re-enable Management Center:
```

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise -f values.yaml --version <new-version>
----

The following solutions upgrade solutions cover scenarios for persistence/hotRestart enabled installations:

== Upgrading from Hazelcast Version 4.x to 5.x

Hazelcast rolling update supports upgrading from 4.2 to 5.0. You can check link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.3/maintain-cluster/rolling-upgrades#hazelcast-members-compatibility-guarantees[Hazelcast's Compatibility Guarantees] for more information.

=== Upgrading from Helm Chart < 3.11 Installations

These versions do not support rolling upgrade, so we propose you to check Alternative Solutions section.

=== Upgrading from Helm Chart 3.11 Installations

3.11 and 5.3.9 are recent versions that upgrade problems are fixed, so that they are compatible. If you are using 3.11, we recommend upgrading to 5.3.9:

[source,bash]
----
helm get values > values.yaml
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --version 5.3.9 -f values.yaml
----

== Upgrading from Hazelcast Version 5.x to 5.x

> We support Hazelcast rolling upgrade and chart upgrade from 5.4.7 to 5.9.2. However, in 5.8.0, there is a breaking change: `hot-restart-persistence` is renamed to `persistence`. Following steps should be applied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hazelcast rolling upgrade and chart upgrade can be used from version 5.4.7 to 5.9.2. However in version 5.8.0,  `hot-restart-persistence` was renamed to `persistence`. To upgrade from version 5.8.0, complete the following steps:
```

> Step 1: Export values of existing installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Export the values from the existing installation:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <installation-name> > values.yaml
----

> Step 2: Modify existing values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Modify existing values:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

> - Optional: `hot-restart-persistence` should be replaced with `persistence` in Hazelcast configuration. See: link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.2/storage/configuring-persistence[Configuring Persistence]. Old configuration is still supported in newer Hazelcast versions, so it is an optional step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Optionally, replace `hot-restart-persistence` with `persistence` in your Hazelcast configuration. For further information on configuring persistence, see the xref:storage:configuring-persistence.adoc[] topic. 
+
NOTE: This step is optional, as the previous configuration is still supported in later Hazelcast versions.
```

> - `hotRestart` field in `values.yaml` should be replaced with `persistence`. See: link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.3/kubernetes/helm-hazelcast-enterprise-chart#5-8-0[Notable Changes in Helm Chart]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replace the `hotRestart` field in the _values.yaml_ file with `persistence`. An example of the required change is provided in the version xref:kubernetes:helm-hazelcast-enterprise-chart.adoc#5-8-0[] section of the the Notable Changes in Helm Chart topic.
```

> Step 3: Upgrade using corrected values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade using your updated values:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --version 5.8.0 -f values.yaml
----

> If you are using versions other than in these ranges, please check the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you are upgrading from a version that is not mentioned above, use an xref:helm-upgrade-guide.adoc#alternative-solutions[alternative method].
```

== Alternative Solutions

> 

Reviewer: The following alternative methods can be used:

* xref:helm-upgrade-guide.adoc#persistence-based[]
* xref:helm-upgrade-guide.adoc#retain-helm-chart-version[]

Reviewer: I think this is part of the Upgrade with Persistence Enabled section, if so, the heading needs to be a level lower (=== Alternative instead of == Alternative)

> === Solution 1: Persistence-based Solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Persistence-based
```

> WARNING: This solution does not support rolling update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: This solution does not support rolling upgrades.
```

> 

Reviewer: To use the persistence-based solution, complete the following steps:

> Step 1: Export values of existing installation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Export the values from your existing installation:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <installation-name> > values.yaml
----

> Step 2: Uninstall existing cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Uninstall existing cluster:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm uninstall <installation-name>
----

> Step 3: Install cluster with the same name using newer helm chart version. It is a must to use the same name to volumes to be attached correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Install a cluster with the same name as the previous cluster but using a later Helm Chart version:
+
WARNING: To attach volumes correctly, you must use the same cluster name.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm install <installation-name> --version <newer-version> -f values.yaml
----

> === Solution 2: Upgrading without Changing the Helm Chart Version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Retain Helm Chart Version
```

> This solution supports rolling update, but as it is not possible to use new charts' features, it is less recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This solution does support rolling upgrades, but does not allow you to benefit from the improvements in later Helm Chart versions.
```

> Following scenario is an example for this solution:

Reviewer: remove

> Assuming Hazelcast version 5.0.0 is already deployed to a cluster using Helm chart version 5.2.0 and the desired Hazelcast version is 5.3.6. As mentioned at the beginning of this document, Hazelcast supports upgrade by increasing single minor version. So, as current cluster's version is 5.0.0, following steps should be applied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example to upgrade Hazelcast version 5.0.0, which was deployed to a cluster using Helm Chart version 5.2.0, to version is 5.3.6, you would complete the following steps:
```

> Step 1: Upgrade Hazelcast Version to 5.1.1 without when helm chart version is fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade Hazelcast to version 5.1.1 without upgrading the Helm Chart version:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
NOTE: As mentioned above, you must upgrade each minor version, so we must upgrade Hazelcast multiple times as shown in the next steps.
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade --reuse-values hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --set image.tag=5.1.1 --version 5.2.0
----

> Step 2: Upgrade Hazelcast Version to 5.2.1 without when helm chart version is fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade Hazelcast to version 5.2.1 without upgrading the Helm Chart version:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade --reuse-values hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --set image.tag=5.2.1 --version 5.2.0
----

> Step 3: Upgrade Hazelcast Version to 5.3.6 without when helm chart version is fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Upgrade Hazelcast to version 5.3.6 without upgrading the Helm Chart version:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

= Helm Upgrade Guide

> Before upgrading, review the Hazelcast's xref:hazelcast:maintain-cluster:rolling-upgrades.adoc#hazelcast-members-compatibility-guarantees[Compatibility Guarantees].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before upgrading, review the Hazelcast xref:hazelcast:maintain-cluster:rolling-upgrades.adoc#hazelcast-members-compatibility-guarantees[Compatibility Guarantees].
```

Due to a link:https://github.com/helm/charts/issues/7803[bug in the Helm Project], the helm upgrade command does not allow modifications to the spec.volumeClaimTemplates property in stateful sets. This results in some limitations for persistence in the Management Center and any hotRestart/persistence using `vilumeClaimTemplates` internally.
The following sections provide some methods of addressing these limitations.

NOTE: Although we have tested common scenarios without hotRestart (persistence) and the Management Center persistence feature enabled, we cannot test every upgrade scenario. If you encounter issues, please contact xref:operator:ROOT:index.adoc#support[Support].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Upgrade Management Center
```

Author: Following steps does not upgrade management center. To upgrade Hazelcast properly, we first disable management center and then upgrade Hazelcast. At last we re-enable management center. So this title is wrong.

Reviewer: OK. I felt the structure was unclear; but I think I see now what was bothering me. 

If we remove the command from step 4, and expand the list item text to "Upgrade your installation, and re-enable Management Center, as described in the Upgrade Hazelcast section below" I think that sorts it.

What do you think?

Author: Yes, that make sense to me, thank you.

> We recommend to disable Management Center before upgrade, and re-enable it after upgrade. You should follow the steps outlined below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend that you disable Management Center before you upgrade, and re-enable it after the upgrade. To do this, complete the following steps:
```

. Export the values from your existing installation:
+

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <installation-name> > values.yaml
----

. Disable Management Center:
+

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade <installation-name> hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise -f values.yaml --version <installed-version> --set mancenter.enabled=false
----

. Delete the persistent volume of the disabled Management Center:
+

[source,bash]
----
kubectl get pvc -o name | grep "mancenter" | xargs -n 1 kubectl delete
----

. Upgrade your installation and re-enable Management Center:
+

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise -f values.yaml --version <new-version>
----

> == Upgrade with Persistence Enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Upgrade Hazelcast
```

> The following sections cover scenarios for upgrading with persistence/hotRestart enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections cover scenarios for upgrading Hazelcast with persistence/hotRestart enabled.
```

----

. Delete the persistent volume of the disabled Management Center:
+

[source,bash]
----
kubectl get pvc -o name | grep "mancenter" | xargs -n 1 kubectl delete
----

. Upgrade your installation without disabling Management Center:
+

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise -f values.yaml --version <new-version>
----

== Upgrade with Persistence Enabled

The following sections cover scenarios for upgrading with persistence/hotRestart enabled.

=== Hazelcast Version 4.x to 5.x

You can use rolling upgrades when moving from version 4.2 to version 5.0. For further information on rolling upgrades, see the xref:maintain-cluster:rolling-upgrades.adoc[] topic.

NOTE: If upgrading from a Helm Chart of version 3.10 or earlier, rolling upgrades are not supported. For information on other ways to upgrade, see the xref:helm-upgrade-guide.adoc#alternative-solutions[] section below.

If you are using version 3.11, we recommend upgrading to 5.3.9 as follows:

[source,bash]
----
helm get values > values.yaml
helm upgrade hz hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --version 5.3.9 -f values.yaml
----

> == Hazelcast Version 5.x to 5.x

Reviewer: I think this is part of the Upgrade with Persistence Enabled section, if so, the heading needs to be a level lower (=== Hazelcast instead of == Hazelcast)

= Helm Upgrade Guide

Before upgrade, we recommend you to check link:https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/5.3/maintain-cluster/rolling-upgrades#hazelcast-members-compatibility-guarantees[Hazelcast's Compatibility Guarantees].

If you are not using Management Center and persistence feature, we don't guarantee for every scenario, but you won't have problems in most Helm upgrade scenarios.

`helm upgrade` command does not allow modifications to `spec.volumeClaimTemplates` property in stateful sets that prevents upgrade which can be seen in link:https://github.com/helm/charts/issues/7803[this helm issue]. Because of this issue, we have some upgrade limitations related to Management Center and persistence. This guide informs you about possible upgrade scenarios.

== Upgrade from Hazelcast Version 4.x to 5.x

> 

Author: If you are using <3.11, you need to use persistence.

- If you are using Helm chart version 3.11, you can upgrade by disabling Management Center on upgrade. You should apply the following commands:

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <name-of-your-installation> -f values.yaml
helm upgrade <name-of-your-installation> hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --version 5.3.9 -f values.yaml --set mancenter.enabled=false
----

> - If you are using Management Center and not using its persistence and Hazelcast's hotRestart features, you can upgrade with High Availability. You should apply the following commands:

Author: hotRestart also known as persistence

Author: you can upgrade with High Availability -> you can do rolling upgrade.

[source,bash]
----
helm get values <name-of-your-installation> -f values.yaml
helm upgrade <name-of-your-installation> hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise --version 5.3.1 -f values.yaml
----

> - If you are not using Management Center but Hazelcast's hotRestart feature, you can apply persistence based solution which won't support High Availability. You should apply the following commands:

Author: This is for < 3.11. Create a section in the top for user <3.11
